Add ana5Utils (#692)
avaframe/AvaFrame: docs/moduleAna5Utils.rst

#####################################################################
ana5Utils
#####################################################################

distanceTimeAnalysis: Visualizing the temporal evolution of flow variables
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the functions gathered in this module, flow variables of avalanche simulation results can be
visualized in a distance versus time diagram, the so called **thalweg-time diagram**.

> The **tt-diagram** provides a new way to identify main features of the temporal evolution of

Author: removed new

avalanche simulation results have been transformed into the radar coordinate system to facilitate
direct comparison, combined with the attempt to analyze simulation results in an avalanche path
dependent coordinate system (:cite:`Fi2013`).
In addition to the **tt-diagram**, :py:mod:`ana5RangeTime` also offers the possibility to
produce simulated **range-time diagrams** of the flow variables with respect to a radar's field
of view. In this manner, simulation results can be directly compared to radar measurements in terms
of front position and inferred approach velocity. The colorcoding of the simulated
**range-time** diagrams refers to average values of the chosen flow parameter
(e.g. flow depth, flow velocity) at specified range gates. This colorcoding is not directly
comparable to the intensity given in the range-time diagram from radar measurements.

.. Note::
  The **tt-diagram** and the **range-time diagram** can be produced *during run time* of
  :py:mod:`com1DFA`, or as a postprocessing step. However, the second option requires saving all the
  required time steps of the flow parameter fields, which is much more computationally expensive
  compared to the first option.

> 

Reviewer: Even if it is only a post-processing step, you would need to alter the output to write each timestep. I disagree because it produces so much overload and is only feasible for a couple of simulations.

> 

Reviewer 2: That is true for the generation of the data, but not for the plotting itself. Similar to saving particles, but doing the postprocessing/visualization i.e. with paraview...
I.e preparation/aggregation of data is fine... @awirb will change it as discussed in meeting.

> 

Author: now we save the mtiInfo as pickle and this is available for plotting afterwards - so no need to save all the result fields but plotting is not inside com1DFA

#####################################################################
ana5Utils
#####################################################################

distanceTimeAnalysis: Visualizing the temporal evolution of flow variables
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the functions gathered in this module, flow variables of avalanche simulation results can be
visualized in a distance versus time diagram, the so called **thalweg-time diagram**.
The **tt-diagram** provides a way to identify main features of the temporal evolution of
flow variables along the :term:`avalanche path`.
This is based on the ideas presented in :cite:`FiFrGaSo2013` and :cite:`RaKo2020`, where
avalanche simulation results have been transformed into the radar coordinate system to facilitate
direct comparison, combined with the attempt to analyze simulation results in an avalanche path
dependent coordinate system (:cite:`Fi2013`).

> In addition to the **tt-diagram**, :py:mod:`ana5RangeTime` also offers the possibility to

Reviewer: I dont understand you naming conventions: pyhton distanceTimeAnalysis.py, here ana5RangeTime, in runscripts runRangeTimeDiagram.py or runThalwegTimeDiagram.py... to me a bit confusing

Author: thanks, I missed this one, should be ana5Utils

produce simulated **range-time diagrams** of the flow variables with respect to a radar field

> of view. With this, simulation results can be directly compared to radar measurements in terms

Reviewer: after radar measurements add (for example MTI images from [ref])

ref = https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JF004375

Author: added

of front position and inferred approach velocity. The colorcoding of the simulated

> **range-time** diagrams refers to average values of the chosen flow parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**range-time** diagrams are the average values of the chosen flow parameter
```

Author: what do you think about show?

> (e.g. flow depth, flow velocity) at specified range gates. This colorcoding is not directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(e.g. flow depth FD, flow velocity FV) at specified range gates. This colorcoding is not directly
```

Author: done

> comparable to the intensity given in the range-time diagram from radar measurements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
comparable to the MTI intensity given in the range-time diagram from radar measurements.
```

Author: done

.. Note::
  The data processing for the **tt-diagram** and the **range-time diagram** can be done
  *during run time* of :py:mod:`com1DFA`, or as a postprocessing step. However, the second option

>   requires saving all the required time steps of the flow variable fields, which is much more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  requires saving and later reading all the time steps of the flow variable fields, which is much more
```

  computationally expensive compared to the first option.

To run
~~~~~~~

During run-time of :py:mod:`com1DFA`:

* in your local copy of ``com1DFA/com1DFACfg.ini`` in [VISUALISATION] set `createRangeTimeDiagram`

>   to True and chose if you want a *TTdiagram* by setting this flag to True or in the case of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to True and choose if you want a *TTdiagram* by setting this flag to True or in the case of a
```

  simulated range-time diagram to False

* in your local copy of ``ana5Utils/distanceTimeAnalysisCfg.ini`` you can adjust the default settings
  for the generation of the diagrams

* run  :py:mod:`runScripts.runThalwegTimeDiagram.py` or :py:mod:`runScripts.runRangeTimeDiagram.py`
  and set the `preProcessedData` flag to `True`

As a postprocessing step:

* have a look at :py:mod:`runScripts.runThalwegTimeDiagram.py` and :py:mod:`runScripts.runRangeTimeDiagram.py`

* in your local copy of ``ana5Utils/distanceTimeAnalysisCfg.ini`` you can adjust the default settings
  for the generation of the diagrams

The resulting figures can be found in ``avalancheDirectory/Outputs/ana5Utils``.

> .. figure:: _static/thalwegTime_FD.png

Reviewer: Approach velocity and value of max velocity have opaque white and not completely transparent background...

Author: yep this is on purpose to make it 'more' visible but not fully hide the underlying lines..

    :width: 90%

>     Thalweg-time diagram example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Thalweg-time diagram example: The y-axis contains the distance from the beta point along the avalanche path, e.g. the thalweg. Dots represent the avalanche front with the slope being the approach velocity. Red star marks the maximal approach velocity.
```

.. Note::
  The **tt-diagram** requires info on an avalanche path (see :ref:`moduleAna3AIMEC:ana3AIMEC: Aimec`).

>   The simulated **range-time diagram** requires info on the x, y coordinate of the radar location, a point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The simulated **range-time diagram** requires info on the x0, y0 coordinate of the radar location, a point xi, yi
```

  in the direction of the field of view, the aperture angle and the width of the range gates.

>   The maximum approach velocity indicated in the diagrams is computed as the ratio of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The maximum approach velocity is indicated in the distance-time diagrams with red star and is computed as the ratio of the
```

  distance travelled by the front and the respective time needed for two increments along the path/

>   radar's field of view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  radar's field of view (e.g. this velocity over two range gates in fact contains a rolling average smoothing.).
```

Theory
~~~~~~~~~

Thalweg-time diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> First, the flow variable result field is transformed into a path-following coordinate system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the flow variable result field is transformed into a path-following coordinate system of which the center line is the thalweg.
```

For this step, functions from :py:mod:`ana3AIMEC` are used.
The distance to the *start of runout area point* is determined using a user defined threshold

> of the flow variable, giving the avalanche front position. The front positions defined with this

Reviewer: I dont understand this sentence: *start of runout area point* is the beta point, right? What has it to do with the threshold to determine the avalanche (not only the front)?

Author: so it can be for flow depth 1m  or 5cm or just >0 so that it everywhere where there is avalanche flow

method for all the time steps are shown as black dots in the **tt-diagram**.
The mean values of the flow variable are computed at cross profiles along the avalanche path for
each time step and included in the **tt-diagram** as colored field.
For this analysis, all available flow variables can be chosen, but the interpretation of the

> tt-diagram structures and the corresponding meaning of avalanche front changes comparing flow thickness or flow velocity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**tt-diagram** structures and the corresponding meaning of avalanche front may be different for flow thickness or flow velocity.
```

Simulated Range-Time diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The radar's field of view is determined using its location, a point in the direction of the field of

> view and the aperture angle. The distance of every point in the simulation results to the radar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
view and the horizontal (azimuth) aperture angle of the antenna. The elevation or vertical aperture angle is not yet included. The line-of-sight distance of every grid point in the simulation results to the radar
```

Author: included

> location is computed. The simulation results which lie outside the radar's field of view are masked.
> The distance of the avalanche front with respect to the radar location is determined for a user
> defined threshold in the flow variable and the average values of range gates along the radar's line
> of sight are computed from the result field.
> This data is plotted in a range-time diagram, where the black dots indicate the avalanche front,
> and the colored field indicates the mean values of the flow parameter for the range gates for each
> time step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
location is computed. The simulation results which lie outside the radar's field of view are masked out.
The distance of the avalanche front with respect to the radar location is determined for a user
defined threshold in the flow variable and the average values of the result field for each range gates along the radar's line
of sight are computed.
This data is plotted in a range-time diagram, where the black dots indicate the avalanche front,
and the colored field indicates the mean values of the flow parameter for the range gates at each
time step.
```

Author: adjusted

**range-time** diagrams show the average values of the chosen flow parameter
(e.g. flow depth (FD), flow velocity (FV)) at specified range gates. This colorcoding is not directly
comparable to the MTI intensity given in the range-time diagram from radar measurements.

.. Note::
  The data processing for the **tt-diagram** and the **range-time diagram** can be done
  *during run time* of :py:mod:`com1DFA`, or as a postprocessing step. However, the second option
  requires first saving and then reading all the required time steps of the flow variable fields,
  which is much more computationally expensive compared to the first option.

To run
~~~~~~~

During run-time of :py:mod:`com1DFA`:

* in your local copy of ``com1DFA/com1DFACfg.ini`` in [VISUALISATION] set `createRangeTimeDiagram`
  to True and choose if you want a *TTdiagram* by setting this flag to True or in the case of a
  simulated range-time diagram to False

* in your local copy of ``ana5Utils/distanceTimeAnalysisCfg.ini`` you can adjust the default settings
  for the generation of the diagrams

* run  :py:mod:`runScripts.runThalwegTimeDiagram.py` or :py:mod:`runScripts.runRangeTimeDiagram.py`

>   and set the `preProcessedData` flag to `True`

Author: great thanks

    the avalanche path, e.g. the thalweg. Dots represent the avalanche front with the slope being
    the approach velocity. Red star marks the maximal approach velocity.

.. Note::
  The **tt-diagram** requires info on an avalanche path (see :ref:`moduleAna3AIMEC:ana3AIMEC: Aimec`).
  The simulated **range-time diagram** requires info on the coordinates of the radar location
  (x0, y0), a point in the direction of the field of view (x1, y1), the aperture angle and the width of
  the range gates. The maximum approach velocity is indicated in the distance-time diagrams with a
  red star and is computed as the ratio of the distance travelled by the front and the respective
  time needed for two increments along the path/  radar's field of view.

Theory
~~~~~~~~~

Thalweg-time diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, the flow variable result field is transformed into a path-following coordinate system, of
which the centerline is the :term:`avalanche path`.
For this step, functions from :py:mod:`ana3AIMEC` are used.
The distance to the *start of runout area point* is determined using a user defined threshold

> of the flow variable, giving the avalanche front position. The front positions defined with this

Author: it is not masked, it is just checking where is the value above threshold

> of the flow variable, giving the avalanche front position. The front positions defined with this

Author: I tried to make this clearer in the sentence

#####################################################################
ana5Utils
#####################################################################

distanceTimeAnalysis: Visualizing the temporal evolution of flow parameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the functions gathered in this module, flow parameters of avalanche simulation results can be
visualized in a distance versus time diagram, the so called **thalweg-time diagram**.
The **tt-diagram** provides a new way to identify main features of the temporal evolution of
a flow parameter along the :term:`avalanche path`.
This is based on the ideas presented in :cite:`FiFrGaSo2013` and :cite:`RaKo2019`, where
avalanche simulation results have been transformed into the radar coordinate system to facilitate

> direct comparison.

Author: added this

In addition to the **tt-diagram**, :py:mod:`ana5RangeTime` also offers the possibility to

> produce simulated **range-time diagrams** of the flow parameters with respect to a radar's field

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
produce simulated **range-time diagrams** of the flow variables with respect to a radar's field
```

* in your local copy of ``ana5Utils/distanceTimeAnalysisCfg.ini`` you can adjust the default settings
  for the generation of the diagrams

The resulting figures can be found in ``avalancheDirectory/Outputs/ana5Utils``.

.. figure:: _static/thalwegTime_FD.png
    :width: 90%

    Thalweg-time diagram example. Maximum approach velocity is computed as the ratio of the
    distance travelled by the front and the respective time needed for two increments along the path.

.. Note::
  The **tt-diagram** requires info on an avalanche path (see :ref:`moduleAna3AIMEC:ana3AIMEC: Aimec`).
  The simulated **range-time diagram** requires info on the x, y coordinate of the radar location, a point
  in the direction of the field of view, the aperture angle and the width of the range gates.

Theory
~~~~~~~~~

Thalweg-time diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, the flow parameter result field is transformed into a path-following coordinate system.
For this step, functions from :py:mod:`ana3AIMEC` are used.
The distance to the *start of runout area point* is determined and the mean values of the cross
profiles along the avalanche path are computed.

> In the **tt-diagram**, the avalanche front position is indicated with black dots and the colored

Reviewer 3: how is front defined?
front, which is defined via a threshold value ... ?

field indicates the mean values of the flow parameter at cross profiles along the avalanche path

> for each time step.

Reviewer 3: for which rasters / flow parameters can a TT diagram be created? all - whats the difference ? is the front always defined with respect to the analyzed aparameter?

Reviewer 3: whort info on the depicted velocities: in which direction are they measured (approach velocities in projected avalanche path), particularly with respect to the flow velocities (surface parallel?). What does the location of the max front velocity indicate?

Author: I updated the paragraph

Simulated Range-Time diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The radar's field of view is determined using its location, a point in the direction of the field of

> view and the aperture angle. The flow parameter result field is transformed in the radar coordinate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
view and the aperture angle. The flow variable result field is transformed in the radar coordinate
```
